veewee/README.rst, before:

Building a Vagrant box
======================

We use `Veewee <https://github.com/jedi4ever/veewee>`_ to build our
Vagrant box.


Installing Veewee
-----------------

The installation instructions included with Veewee encourage you to use
one of several tools to isolate the Veewee gem (a gem is Ruby's equivalent
of a Python package) in a virtualenv.  That did not work for me,
unfortunately.  I gave up and installed Veewee system-wide.  This option
is not included in the documentation.  You are encouraged by the Veewee
team to build Veewee from source.  On a Mac, you might want to use the
Homebrewed version of Ruby, not the system default::

    $ brew install ruby

To clone the Veewee repository::

    $ git clone https://github.com/jedi4ever/veewee.git

To build the gem::

    $ cd veewee/
    $ gem build veewee.gemspec
    $ gem install veewee-0.3.7.gem

To verify that the binary is in the correct place and included in your
PATH::

    $ cd
    $ which veewee


Source of the SLC5.9 box definitions
------------------------------------

In a pristine publicdb repository, the veewee directory looks like::

    $ tree
    .
    └── definitions
        └── SLC5.9
            ├── definition.rb
            ├── ks.cfg
            └── postinstall.sh

The definitions were originally created using::

    $ veewee vbox define SLC5.9 'scientificlinux-5.9-x86_64'

Only slight modification were made: the number of CPUs was increased to
four, the amount of memory was increased to 512 Mb and the kernel
parameter 'divider=10' was added to work around an issue of the VM using a
lot of CPU because of a high-frequency clock interrupt.


Building the Vagrant box
------------------------

Navigate to the veewee directory in the publicdb repository (the directory
containing this very file).  Then issue the following commands::

    $ veewee vbox build --auto SLC5.9
    $ veewee vbox export SLC5.9

The Vagrant box is located in the current working directory.

Commit message:

Updated box definitions and added hisparc user

veewee/README.rst, after:

Building a Vagrant box
======================

We use `Veewee <https://github.com/jedi4ever/veewee>`_ to build our
Vagrant box.


Installing Veewee
-----------------

The installation instructions included with Veewee encourage you to use
one of several tools to isolate the Veewee gem (a gem is Ruby's equivalent
of a Python package) in a virtualenv.  That did not work for me,
unfortunately.  I gave up and installed Veewee system-wide.  This option
is not included in the documentation.  You are encouraged by the Veewee
team to build Veewee from source.  On a Mac, you might want to use the
Homebrewed version of Ruby, not the system default::

    $ brew install ruby

To clone the Veewee repository::

    $ git clone https://github.com/jedi4ever/veewee.git

To build the gem::

    $ cd veewee/
    $ gem build veewee.gemspec
    $ gem install veewee-0.3.7.gem

To verify that the binary is in the correct place and included in your
PATH::

    $ cd
    $ which veewee


Source of the SLC5.9 box definitions
------------------------------------

In a pristine publicdb repository, the veewee directory looks like::

    $ tree
    .
    └── definitions
        └── SLC5.9
            ├── definition.rb
            ├── ks.cfg
            └── postinstall.sh

The definitions were originally created using::

    $ veewee vbox define SLC5.9 'scientificlinux-5.9-x86_64'

Only slight modification were made: the number of CPUs was increased to
four, the amount of memory was increased to 512 Mb and the kernel
parameter 'divider=10' was added to work around an issue of the VM using a
lot of CPU because of a high-frequency clock interrupt.

Furthermore, a default 'hisparc' user was added so that we can simulate an
actual HiSPARC server installation.


Building the Vagrant box
------------------------

Navigate to the veewee directory in the publicdb repository (the directory
containing this very file).  Then issue the following commands::

    $ veewee vbox build --auto SLC5.9
    $ veewee vbox export SLC5.9

The Vagrant box is located in the current working directory.
